The Limits of our Telescopes: The System NGC 5907 - MNRAS Style
Throughout science, our ability to observe and predict the universe is limited by the tools by which we do it. This is particularily true in astronomy, where modern telescopes can often achieve a depth of 26 - 27 mag/arcsec^2. This means any object, system, or structure in a galaxy dimmer than this magnitude will simply not appear in our observations. Objects this dim are often described as being in the Low Surface Brightness (LSB) regime. Observing in this regime could be the key to further constraining our cosmological models and galactic evolutionary theories. Being able to reliable observe this regime also has direct impacts on what we see in the local universe around us.

A significant tension has developed about the galactic system NGC 5907 (see attached image 1). This is an edge on system with a stunning double corkscrew stellar stream surrounding it. This is also a very famous system, and is often used in astronomy talks around the world to describe interacting galaxies, or LSB structures. This famous image is the result of tireless work conducted by an amateur astronomer in Australia who gained world recognition for this, and other astrophotography projects, around the world. 

However, in 2018 - 2019, the Dragonfly telescope was trained upon this object. Dragonfly is a telescope specifically designed to reach extremely deep magnitudes (about 29 - 31 mags/arcsec). To the surprise of the observers, the full stellar stream could not be recovered. Only a single, arching stellar stream was found in their observations (see attached image 2). Therefore, which is correct? 

In this project, we will use the archival data of another high depth, long time exposure telescope named the Hyper Suprim Cam Subaru (HSC) telescope. We will attempt to recover the double corkscrew structure, first with conventional image reduction and sky subtraction methods, but then with novel approaches used source extraction software. The aim will be to decisively say whether the double corkscrew structure can be recovered HSC data, and add a secondary opinion on this area of contention.

The Limits of our Telescopes: The System NGC 5907 - Redraft - A&A Style
Context. The Low Surface Brightness regime is one at the very limits of our telescopes. Objects in this regime are defined as those with magnitudes less than 28 mags/arcsec^{2}. Analysing objects in this regime requires long with observations powerful telescopes and even more careful reduction and analysis of resulting data. The types of objects which exist in this regime are ultra-diffuse galaxies, low-mass dwarf galaxies, tidal debris and tidal features of high surface brightness galaxies. A recent tension has arisen around the low surface brightness structure around the edge-on NGC 5907. Striking amateur photographs of the galaxy show a large, double looped stellar stream about it. However, recent observations using the Dragonfly telescope (down to 30.3 mags/arcsec^{2}) have been unable to recover the full feature, recovering only a single loop of the iconic stellar stream.

Aims. The aim of this project is use archival imaging from the Hyper Suprime-Cam (HSC) telescope of the Subaru Strategic Program to recover the iconic double loop stellar stream. We will also investigate if photographic plate images exist of this object, and if the stellar streams can be found within these.

Methods. The student will have to conduct extensive data reduction and investigation of legacy archival data, getting the images down to the 28th - 30th mag/arcsec^{2}. We will then investigate if the double loop feature can be recovered, or if we can recover the Dragonfly observations. We will also apply novel source extraction techniques to attempt to recover the stellar stream from the backround noise of the HSC observations.

Please Note. This project is dependent on a successful application to the Royal Astronomical Society (RAS) for funding of £1,200 (made by the supervisors of this project) for a six week project. If successful, other funding will be sought after but cannot be guaranteed.

Students to Apply. This position is open to all physics students currently in the 2nd or 3rd year of their studies. Python programming experience is preferred, but programming experience is essential. The successful applicant will recieve confirmation by the 7th of February.